Once around Wolf Ray stars. Now this is
a talk that I've put together because a
number of people have actually asked for
a talk on this very subject. So let's
begin I guess at the beginning and we
should discuss why they're called Wolf
and Ray. And of course it's named after
Charles Wolf and Gor Ray of the Paris
Observatory.
In 1867, they were observing stars in
the constellation of Signis, the Swan,
and they found three rather peculiar
ones. HD19765,
HD for the Henry Draper catalog, and the
other catalog numbers there. Now, we
call them WR134,135,
and 137, which is rather easier to say,
but there was something very odd about
them.
The first thing was that the color of
them revealed that they were very hot.
Looking at how the brightness of the
light changed with color, you could see
that the light was steeply climbing to a
peak. Um, very much at the short
wavelength, high frequency end of
things. ordinary stars. It is the black
body radiation as it's called caused by
just simply their temperature that
dominates their color. So a red star
puts most of its energy out at around
about 700 nanometers in the red part of
the spectrum. Yellow stars that peak has
moved to the left. Blue stars, it's
moved to the left even further as the
temperature has gone up to 18,000.
But with these particular stars, we
couldn't see a peak at all because the
peak had moved into the ultraviolet and
in some cases off into the X-ray region
of the spectrum at incredibly high
energies, high frequencies, short
wavelengths.
And that corresponds to temperatures
from 20,000 all the way up to 200,000
Kelvin. And actually the vast majority
of the light is coming out at those high
invisible wavelengths rather than them
being bright in the visible part that's
now down in the long tail. So this was
very intriguing that these stars were so
hot and they were given a new class of
W. The original designations were made
up according to their spectral type with
OB, A, F, G, K, and M. And W was added
on the front because these are in order
of temperature from cool red dwarfs all
the way up to hot blue Oclass stars.
Now, there are numerous cataloges of
different uh designations. We have the
WR Wolf Ray catalog organized across the
sky by the right ascension coordinate.
There's the BAT 99 catalog of Wolf Rays
in the large melanic cloud. And there
are several others depending on uh who's
put these together and where they are in
space.
Originally, Wolf Rayets were thought to
be the central stars of planetary
nebula. White dwarf stars can be very
high temperature indeed. And white
dwarfs are the product of the death of a
modest star where it puffs off its outer
layers creating that planetary nebula
and leaving the dead nuclear core, the
white dwarf star in the middle, often at
100,000 degrees or so and gradually
cooling over time. So this seemed like a
possibility,
but
this is not what's going on. The picture
on the left here is the cresant nebula.
This is insignus the swan as well and
it's also a wolf ray star and far from
being a small um white dwarf star this
is really quite a massive star and very
bright indeed. So something different is
going on.
The other strange feature was that when
we look at the spectrum of the light
from stars, we spread out all of that
black body radiation from the surface of
the star into its component colors of
the spectrum. And we see dark absorption
lines from cooler gases in the outer
atmospheres of the stars where the atoms
and molecules that are present in that
atmosphere absorb particular frequencies
as they vibrate and change energy state
and this takes a bite out of the
spectrum leaving a dark line. But in
wolf fra what we were seeing was not
dark lines but bright lines. These are
from the emission of light as excited
energized atoms decay back to the ground
state.
But those emission lines didn't seem to
match any that we would normally find.
This gentleman, Pickering, who's imaged
up on the right hand corner here,
thought it was a weird form of hydrogen
because if you look at the pattern of
lines from hydrogen gas, and this is an
example in the spectrum on the left
there, this is actually the Balma
series. And Pickering thought the lines
were similar to the Balma series, but
shifted. and the pattern and the
relationship between their wavelengths
and energies and frequencies seem to be
a similar pattern. He called it the
Pickering series. Always worth naming
these things after yourself, isn't it?
So, what's going on? Well, in an excited
hydrogen atom with the electrons pushed
up into a higher state, that electron
can fall back down into a lower state
and give off its excess energy. And if
it lands in an energy level number two,
n= 2 there from a higher state 3 4 5 or
six you get the different wavelengths of
light emitted. You get the uh red line
at 656 nanometers. You get the others in
the turquoise and the uh blue part of
the spectrum there all the way up to the
violet. And they gradually get closer
and closer together as the energy states
approach. uh just a continuum when you
get to very high excitation numbers and
that's in the visible part of the
spectrum. If the electron was dropping
all the way to the n equals 1 level,
you'd get a lot more energy. So you get
a shorter wavelength, higher frequency
photon in the ultraviolet and a line
there is part of the lyman series
because you get all the different
transitions there as well. And if it's a
weaker transition coming down to the n
equals 3 level, you get a photon in the
infrared and it's called the passion
series. So hydrogen has this very
characteristic set of lines in these
series depending on what that electron
is doing.
But the pattern was similar but didn't
seem to quite match.
And in fact, this is the emission
spectrum that we were dealing with. You
have the spectrum from hydrogen there at
the top and the gas concerned here was
helium but it was ionized helium with
only one electron present. So helium
plus and the electron in helium plus has
no competition. So it's just like
hydrogen. It can behave in a similar way
and make all those similar energy level
transitions. But this time the nucleus
has double the charge plus two and four
times the mass and that affects the
position and energy level of the pattern
that you see but not the shape of the
pattern. The pattern is similar. So
Pickering had spotted that the pattern
was similar correctly but he should have
ascribed it to um this ionized helium
being the culprit.
And this is characteristic of wilfraad
stars. They generally are lacking in
hydrogen lines in their spectrum. The
most prominent emission lines are helium
and sometimes you get highly ionized
lines from carbon, nitrogen or oxygen.
But the hydrogen is either weak or
completely missing.
In 1938,
the W class of stars was further split
up creating the WN and WC categories for
N dominated by nitrogen and C dominated
by carbon or oxygen. And in 1969 that
was rationalized and WO was separated
out so for the oxygenrich stars. So we
had these three subclasses depending on
which elements were dominating in the
spectrum. Scientists love to classify
things like this. Now,
we know that hydrogen is fused to helium
in ordinary stars and that the next step
is to fuse helium to carbon in what's
called the triple alpha process. And
then you can take another helium nucleus
and stick it to a carbon atom and make
oxygen. And it goes on in steps of two
creating the evenumbered elements. So
where is all the nitrogen coming from?
As an oddnumbered element between carbon
and oxygen in the periodic table, it
must get formed somehow. And indeed, you
don't get as much of it, but it is
there. And it's there because in the
superheated environment of stars,
ordinary carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen
atoms can play a part in what's called
the CNO cycle. So if you start at the
top with an ordinary carbon 12 nucleus,
you can hit it with a proton and if it's
got enough energy, it can stick to make
nitrogen 13. That can decay by throwing
out an anti-electron, a positron, and a
gamma ray and some energy. Give you
carbon 13. Repeat the process. You get
nitrogen 14, ordinary nitrogen. It goes
on then to oxygen 15 and then nitrogen
15 and back to carbon in a catalytic
cycle spitting out a helium nucleus. So
in the cycle you take four hydrogens in
and you emit a helium and this is a very
efficient process and stars from the
mass of the sun upwards use this to
carry out their nuclear fusion very
efficiently.
But you have to have some nitrogen and
some oxygen present in order for this to
work. And we don't have a problem making
oxygen. But the nitrogen is made by the
steps in this process gradually building
up enough of it for it to become
available for the catalysis.
Now another feature of the spectral
lines was that they were shown to be
very broad. And this is Doppler
broadening. It's the high-speed motion
of the gas and it's either moving
towards you or away from you. And the
high temperature gas and the high motion
of the gas churning around can broaden
the lines out to give you these very
very fat spectral lines. And this uh was
really pivotal in noticing that the
ionized helium was at a very high
temperature and was often being hurled
across space, sometimes in our
direction, sometimes away from us. And
so we were getting this very substantial
line broadening and beginning to
understand what the nature of these wolf
ray stars was.
So, we've now found thousands of them.
About 600 in the Milky Way, 166 in the
Magelenic clouds, 154 in Andromeda at
the last count, 206 in the Triangulum
galaxy, and we're beginning to find them
in other more distant galaxies as well,
although uh there may be thousands of
them as candidates rather than confirmed
at this stage, but I'm sure they will be
all over the place.
And with this larger sample, what we're
able to do is understand that there are
more than one type of them. We have the
classical wolf ray stars.
These are massive red super giants that
have
started to lose their outer layers. They
eject their outer shells even while they
are still burning internally very
fiercely.
So the hydrogen envelope is ejected and
what you see then is the exposed inner
workings of the deeper shells within the
star. Um and we see those as wolf rayets
and they could be a 100,000 times the
output power of the sun. Um these are
often population one stars with higher
metallicity. In other words, they've got
more of the heavy elements picked up
from previous generations of stars. And
the reason for that, well, there's two
reasons really. One is that higher
metallicity
encourages faster mass loss. It changes
the way radiation pressure can drive the
outer layers to move outwards. And the
second one is that well they're
obviously all population one stars
because such massive stars as these live
fast and die young and so any from older
population tube uh categorizations would
be old stars and there are no old large
stars. The large stars just don't live
long enough.
So we've got these classical wolf
rayets. We've also discovered that there
are some stars that were classified as
Wolf Ray but have some hydrogen in their
spectrum. And these turn out to be
almost proto stars. They're very massive
but still very young stars that have
only just begun fusing hydrogen to
helium in their cores. But they're so
massive and so powerful that their power
output can be of the order of a million
times that of our sun. And this is WR31A
here which is classed as a W for wolf
riot N for nitrogen present in the
spectrum and H for some hydrogen being
visible as well. See it's
subcategorization.
So this is not the same as the classical
Wclass stars.
You often get the activity in the middle
bringing to the surface through
convection helium, carbon, nitrogen and
oxygen. Um and that's a rather different
process to exposing the core which you
have in a classical wolf ray where the
core has already created large amounts
of layering of helium followed by carbon
followed by oxygen layers within the
star. um these ones have created some in
their core
but it's been brought to the surface
rather than the surface having been
removed
and
then we have planetary nebula cores
roughly 10% of the stars classified as
wolf ray are in fact at the core of a
planetary nebula and these exhibit hibit
all those characteristics of wolf rayets
but they're not from the same mechanism
at all they're much less massive stars
post AGB post asic giant branch stars
which have fused hydrogen to helium and
then helium to carbon and oxygen in the
core and then have been ejecting their
envelopes in classic planetary nebula
style and so these things are typically
on their way to forming white dwarfs
around about 60% % of the mass of the
sun, but they are putting out a spectrum
that looks like a wolf ray. So, they're
almost false wolf rays. Um, and they are
much less powerful than the other two.
These are only about a thousand times as
bright as the sun rather than a 100,000
or even a million for the classical and
uh protoar type wolf rays.
Some wolf rarettes are formed as part of
binary systems and this can sort of
create a wolf ray without the normal
ejection of the outer layers. You can
add material from a binary companion and
the mass transfer can remove material
from the outer layers. So rather than it
being traditional mass loss due to the
sheer temperature and radiation
pressure, the companion can steal the
material away. And in the Milky Way
about 20% of the apparent wolf rays are
created by this mass transfer. But in
the small melaninic cloud where the
amount of heavier elements is much much
lower much lower metallicity
we think about 95% of the wolf rays that
we see there are from this binary
accretion process.
This uh low metallicity means you can't
form a wolf ray unless the star starts
with at least 50 solar masses. Um in the
Milky Way that figure is about 20 solar
masses for being able to uh form a wolf
ray. But uh you need to be much much
larger because the metallicity means
that the uh mass loss is much slower for
a given uh amount of material. So it
varies and it varies in proportion to
this metallicity factor. We find that
very much the case. Um the higher
metalicity faster mass loss leads to the
star avoiding being a core collapse
supernova
and so it creates this initial mass
limit. In the Milky Way as I said it's
about 20 solar masses. In the melanic
clouds the metality is lower in the
large melanic cloud 30 solar masses and
the SMC lower still at 50 solar masses.
higher mass stars or stars that begin
life with a higher mass than this can
retain their envelope longer. And if
they manage to do that, then they
undergo the core collapse supernova. And
so you need to be above the limit for
being able to have a mass loss that
strips the star before the supernova
stage in order to form a wolf ray. I
hope that's clear.
And when these things explode, we get a
supernova. Now, supernova were
originally classified by their spectrum.
And this is one of those classifications
that I wish we could change in
astronomy. We have fundamentally type
one where the spectrum lacked hydrogen
and type two where hydrogen lines were
dominated. And type one is further
subdivided into 1 A, 1 B and 1 C. There
are many more subclassifications but
these are the main points.
So wolf rretes having lost their outer
hydrogen when they explode they are seen
as type one because there's no hydrogen
there to emit any of its characteristic
spectral lines.
But let's just dig into this a little
deeper. Let's look at the mechanisms.
A better way of classifying things is
that we have different causes of
supernovi.
Type 1A are exploding white dwarfs.
Typically
a medium mass star little bit larger
than the sun has run through its life
cycle created a carbon oxygen core with
a coat of helium and then runs out of
ability to carry on with nuclear fusion
resulting in the
outer layers being ejected and creates a
white dwarf and a planetary nebula.
And then the white dwarf, if it picks up
more material somehow, can exceed that
magic chandra limit and explode as a
type 1A supernova. When it does so, the
explosion is powerful enough carbon
starts to fuse. You get carbon plus
carbon fusing to make heavier elements
and a whole series of chemical or
nuclear reactions occurs creating the
elements silicon, sulfur, iron and so on
and the whole star detonates and
destroys the star.
Much more massive stars more than about
10 times the mass of the sun undergo
this core collapse process. So medium to
large stars die when the outer layers
still contain unprocessed hydrogen and
they are classified as type two because
of that hydrogen being present. So these
are core collapse
but so are the larger stars. So massive
stars which have lost their hydrogen.
These are also core collapse supernovi.
Um but we see them without the hydrogen.
we see primarily helium in the spectrum
and these were classified type 1b. Um
and then the really really massive stars
at the upper end of things tend to have
lost both their hydrogen and their
helium and we classify those as the WC
WN and WO type Wolf Rays and those
explode as type 1 C. So, it's all about
mass and whether the core collapses
except for the type 1A's, the exploding
white dwarfs. And you can see really
that we we need to reorganize this
classification system and come up with
something that makes more sense now that
we understand what's going on. So,
anyway, wolf ray stars lead to either
type 1B or type 1 C supernovi.
The more modest wolf rayots retaining
their helium
show helium lines and are therefore type
1b. And the more extreme
WN, WC, and WO stars where the core
carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen has been
exposed and the helium blown away show
as type 1 C. And this is an example of a
supernova that was classified type 1 C.
So, SN209 for the year HGP, which is the
letter sequence that tells you when it
was detected, and that was on 8th of
June 2019 at the Zviki transient
facility. the ZTF.
Um, and this was a billion light years
from Earth and a Wolf Ray star that
exploded and it showed carbon and oxygen
lines in the spectrum and therefore type
1 C. So no helium present, but it was
unusual in that it also showed neon
being present. And so these have now
been given the designation type 1 CN
where N stands for neon. Just goes to
show we really need to fix this
classification system, doesn't it? But
uh we actually have some pre-explossion
and uh during the explosion images for
you down a little bit small down at the
right there and the spectrum of this
particular supernova showing those neon
lines that were present in the uh green
and yellow colors there. So uh uh this
obviously had gone a little further in
creating a layer of neon in the
spectrum.
Another nice example is gamma 2 velour
WR11
called the spectral gem because of the
amazing spectrum of the star itself.
There are at least four stars there.
WR11 the wolf ray with a companion
O type star of 30 solar masses. And it's
the O type star that you're seeing in
the image at the top right there because
that's responsible for most of the
visible light. Though the power output
of WR11 is much greater. Most of it's in
the ultraviolet where you can't see it.
There are several smaller companions
also in this complicated system and
we're not sure if they're all part of
the same system or just happen to be
line of sight at this stage. Maybe we'll
be able to come back to that. But at the
moment, WR11 is a 9 solar mass object,
but it began life at 35.
And the mass loss has been tremendous
with uh all of that drop from 35 down to
9 having occurred. And the outer
temperature 90,000 Kelvin. So very very
hot indeed. and it's emitting most of
its light in the ultraviolet, but it's
also giving off gamma rays. So, the
gamma ray emissions are a little bit of
a mystery.
Another one called APE, named after the
Egyptian serpent god, also given
categorization WR70-16.
This is a triple star system in the
constellation of Norma, 15,000 light
years away. In the very very center, too
close together to see as individual
stars, we have a pair of wolf rayets
orbiting each other in 193 period, just
under 200 years. And that rapid rotation
is causing this pinwheel swirl in the
shape of the ejected material that these
stars are violently blowing outwards
away from themselves, both of them. And
then the other star that you can see in
the image there is another hot super
giant. Not as hot or as big as the wolf
rays, but it's uh in a 10,000year
long orbit carving through that gas and
dust shell. And we think that APE is a
candidate for exploding as a gammaray
burst. the uh very very violent death of
these truly enormous stars. Um and that
would be very spectacular and we just
have to hope it's not dangerous because
even though it's 15,000 light years away
um that is not very far in terms of the
threat from being in the beam of a gamma
ray explosion.
Another example WR22.
This is again a binary. This time the
two stars manage to create an eclipsing
binary from our line of sight. So one of
them crosses in front of the other. But
we only see one of the crossings. The
second crossing due perhaps to the
elliptical nature of the orbit means
that the alignment isn't perfect. So we
only see one half of the eclipsing
effect. Um, and so what we have here is
a Wolf Ray WN7H.
And so you now know that WN means
there's nitrogen in the spectrum. And
the lowercase H means there's a little
bit of hydrogen there as well. Um, and
seven tells you how intense the spectrum
is. That's just a a number n to nine.
We think this is a very massive star. 60
to 70 solar masses, 45,000 Kelvin, and 2
million times brighter than uh the sun.
So, this is probably a youngster, and
it's probably still got a lot of
hydrogen in its outer layers at this
stage. And its companion, well, it's an
09 blue giant star. Little bit cooler,
33,000 Kelvin, and only 130,000 times as
bright as the sun. But of course, most
of that light is in the visible part of
the spectrum where we can actually see
it. And that is what you're seeing in
the center of this lovely photograph.
Other wolf rats R136A1.
This is a subject of a video all in its
own called once around R136A1.
And you can see a slide from that video
there. So you can go and find that if
you're interested. But this is perhaps
the most massive and brightest star we
know of. Um it's at probably around 200
times the mass of the sun and puts out 5
million times the power output. Um so if
you're interested in that one, go and
check out that video. There's a lot to
say about that particular one and some
very spectacular images as well.
Then we have the runaway VFTS682.
This is in the large melenic cloud and
it's associated with our 136 that star
cluster that contains the star the pre
that was mentioned on the previous
slide. And this particular one, VFTts
682, probably originated in the R136
cluster and was hurled out across space
by uh some sort of cosmic near miss.
Gravitational slingshot tends to hurl
stars out of these globular clusters or
open clusters. And then they uh travel
around independently often at high speed
to uh into uh quite large orbits around
their local galaxy. In this case, the
large melenic cloud and again this is
another youngster with some hydrogen
present in the spectrum. So it's showing
nitrogen. So it's WN and lowerase H for
hydrogen there. 3.2 2 million times the
power output of the sun and 138 times
its mass. So this is a monster star that
has been hurled out of the R136 star
cluster.
And then we have entire galaxies called
Wolf Ray galaxies.
And this one, this is the antenna
galaxies, NGC 4038 and 4039.
A pair of galaxies that are in the
process of merging together. And that is
creating a huge starburst of many many
stars being formed due to all the shock
waves and the gas compression that is
going on
in the Milky Way. Roughly speaking, we
get three stars the mass of the sun or
three solar masses worth of stars formed
every year. In a starburst galaxy like
this, it's 100. So 30 times as much star
formation going on here. And if you're
forming lots of stars, you will form
quite a few big ones. It rapidly tends
to use up the available gas while you're
doing so, of course, because it traps
the gas into the bodies of stars. But
this is forming a lot of new wolf rats,
and this galaxy is absolutely riddled
with them. And so I will leave it there.
Thank you very much again for listening
to this video once around Wolf Ray stars
and uh especially thank you to the
people that suggested that I take a look
at this subject.
As ever there's more to it than I
thought there was when I started
researching it. Um and so I find making
these videos uh very interesting and
hopefully just as interesting as you do
listening to them. Please hit the
subscribe button if you get the chance
and uh you'll then get notified of any
new ones of course and I do try and put
out new ones on a fairly regular basis.
But I'm also open to suggestions like I
was for this one. So if you've got any
burning subjects that you want me to
take a look at and if I can then I will
dig into them and try and put a video
together. Thanks a lot.